#+SETUPFILE: ../aux/head.org
#+TITLE: December: video project update

* December: video project update

[2014-12-14 Sun]

The video project has been progressing nicely: all of the videos have
now been compressed and most have been uploaded to either Youtube or
Lecturecast.

The Methods 3 videos have accrued more than 11,000 minutes of views:
an average of 37 views each with an average view duration of just over
10 minutes.

One can make some interesting deductions about study patterns. Methods
3, Lecture 10, part 1 (with 92 views at an average of 14.41 minutes
per view) is the most watched. It concerns the theory and computation
of Fourier series and the application of this to the solution of the
heat equation. A large number of these views occurred the day before a
homework was due which made heavy use of the material in this
lecture. As a counterpoint to this, reading week (when the students
had extra time to catch up on lectures) was a time of relatively
low-use. In general, activity peaks around the time when homework
deadlines loom and I anticipate that we will have another huge peak
around exam term.

** Feedback

I have had some very positive feedback about how useful the videos
have been (even offers to film for free!) and some excellent
suggestions for improvement. These included adding the date of the
lecture to the video title (for ease of comparison with lecture notes)
and giving more detailed descriptions of lecture content in the video
caption (including timings of different sections of each lecture);
this would make it easier to navigate through a solid hour of
material. While I don't have time to do this scrupulously, I have
added some pointers in some of the videos.

The audio quality is still pretty poor and I do not know how to
improve this.

A Moodle feedback questionnaire had relatively low uptake (11/195
responses), so nothing of statistically significance can be said. All
but one respondent thought videos were useful in principle, but by its
nature the questionnaire is likely to attract responses from students
who were most enthusiastic about the videos in the first place. The
comments left were extremely positive.

** Lecturecast

I had to compress my videos much further before they were able to be
uploaded to Lecturecast, and the Lecturecast system has proved very
user-unfriendly. For instance, uploads are made using a Java applet
which fails to run on Linux because it requires unrestricted
permissions (even Windows warns you about this and explains that the
code will soon be deprecated). Whatâ€™s wrong with a simple HTML upload
form?

Note that eight out of the eleven students who responded to the Moodle
questionnaire preferred the lectures to be available on Youtube rather
than Lecturecast. Two had no strong opinion. One preferred
Lecturecast. I do not see that the sample bias present in the
questionnaire (self-selecting the most enthusiastic students) would
correlate with this particular variable, so I am inclined to take this
at face value (bearing in mind that the sample size is rather small).

** The next step

At this point in the project two things are clear:

- Some students are making good use of these resources and appreciate
  their availability.
- The scheme would be difficult to implement on a large scale without
  significant help from administrative and technical support staff.

To elaborate on the second point:

- Each hour of video is currently taking four hours to compress and
  further time to upload. My laptop is running late into the night and
  at the weekend. This would need to be automated and done on a
  UCL-based computer.
- We would need more cameras and more SD cards (to avoid problems with
  batteries running down and memory running out). And better quality
  microphones.
- The cost of hiring students to film is nontrivial. I think that
  having mathematically competent human being filming has made a
  significant difference to these videos and we have much better
  quality as a result. But is there room in the department budget to
  run such a project again and on a larger scale?

I think the full picture of how useful these videos have been will
only emerge later in the year (at exam time).
